<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Bibliography</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="part-4-bibliographt" epub:type="bibliography">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Bibliography</h3>
				<ol>
					<li>
						<p>General Gordon. Reflections in Palestine. Letters. Khartoum Journals.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>E. Hake. The Story of Chinese Gordon.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>H. W. Gordon. Events in the Life of C. G. Gordon.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>D. C. Boulger. Life of General Gordon.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Sir W. Butler. General Gordon.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Rev. R. H. Barnes and C. E, Brown. Charles George Gordon: A Sketch.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>A. Bioves. Un Grand Aventurier.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Li Hung Chang. Memoirs.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Colonel Chaille-Long. My Life in Four Continents.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Lord Cromer. Modern Egypt.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Sir R. Wingate. Mahdiism and the Sudan.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Sir R. Slatin. Fire and Sword in the Sudan.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>J. Ohrwalder. Ten Years of Captivity in the Mahdi's Camp.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>C. Neufeld. A Prisoner of the Khaleefa.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Wilfrid Blunt. A Secret History of the English Occupation of Egypt.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Gordon at Khartoum.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Winston Churchill. The River War.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>F. Power. Letters from Khartoum.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Lord Morley. Life of Gladstone.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>George W. Smalley. Mr Gladstone. Harper's Magazine, 1898.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>B. Holland. Life of the Eighth Duke of Devonshire.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Lord Fitzmaurice. Life of the Second Earl Granville.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>S. Gwynn and Gertrude Tuckwell. Life of Sir Charles Dilke.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Arthur Rimbaud. Lettres.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>G. F. Steevens. With Kitchener to Khartoum.</p>
					</li>
				</ol>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
